vvs_webapp/vv02_58182.md, before:

# VVS02 - WebApp Integration Tests Report

INTRODUCTION


## End-to-end Testing

Five key test narratives were implemented using HtmlUnit inside the test class `HtmlUnitTests.java` of the package `vvs_webapp` to end-to-end test the SUT.

### Test Architecture

All tests share:
- a WebClient configuration
- a reference to the `index.html` page
- helper methods for common operations (adding/removing customers, creating sales, etc.)

Each test follows the same pattern:
- set up the necessary preconditions
- perform the actions being tested
- verify the intermediary steps and results with assertions
- clean up by removing any test data to leave the database in its original state

### 1. Adding Addresses to Existing Customer
**Method:** `addTwoAddressesToCustomerTest()`
- Retrieves an existing customer's VAT number
- Gets initial count of customer addresses
- Adds two new addresses with predefined data
- Verifies the address table now includes both new addresses
- Confirms the total row count increased by exactly two

### 2. Customer Insertion
**Method:** `insertTwoCustomersTest()`
- Adds two new customers with VAT, designation, and phone details
- Navigates to the "List All Customers" page
- Verifies all customer information appears correctly in the list
- Cleans up by removing the test customers

### 3. Sale Creation
**Method:** `insertSaleTest()`
- Creates a temporary customer
- Adds a new sale for this customer
- Verifies the sale appears with status "O" (Open)
- Confirms the sale is properly associated with the customer's VAT number
- Cleans up by removing the temporary customer

### 4. Sale Closure
**Method:** `closeSaleTest()`
- Creates a temporary customer
- Adds a new sale to the customer
- Retrieves the sale ID
- Closes the sale
- Verifies the sale status changes to "C" (Closed)
- Cleans up by removing the temporary customer

### 5. Delivery Creation
**Method:** `insertDeliveryTest()`
- Creates a new customer with complete details
- Adds an address to the customer
- Creates a new sale for the customer
- Navigates to the delivery creation page
- Retrieves the previously inserted sale ID and address ID
- Creates a delivery connecting the sale and address
- Verifies the delivery appears correctly in the delivery table


## Database Testing

Three test classes were implemented using DbSetup to test the database operations: `CustomersDBTest`, `SalesDBTest`, and `SaleDeliveriesDBTest`. The tests are supported by a utility class `DBSetupUtils` that handles database setup and provides common operations.

### Database Setup

The `DBSetupUtils` class provides:
- Constants for database connection
- Operations for cleaning the database (`DELETE_ALL`)
- Predefined test data including customers, sales, addresses, and deliveries
- Combined operations like `INSERT_CUSTOMER_SALE_DATA`, `INSERT_CUSTOMER_ADDRESS_DATA` and `INSERT_CUSTOMER_ADDRESS_SALE_DATA`

Each test class uses a similar setup strategy:
- `@BeforeAll`: Connects to the test database
- `@BeforeEach`: Resets the database and loads appropriate test data

### Customer Tests

**Method:** `addCustomerWithExistingVATTest()`

Tests that the SUT prevents adding a customer with an existing VAT number
1. Retrieves all existing customers
2. Attempts to add each customer again with the same data
3. Verifies that an `ApplicationException` is thrown for each attempt
4. Verifies that the number of customers matches the initial count

**Method:** `updateCustomerContactTest()`

Tests that customer contact information is properly updated
1. Retrieves all existing customers
2. Updates the phone number for all customers to a new value
3. Verifies that all customers now have the new phone number

**Method:** `deleteAllCustomersTest()`

Tests that deleting all customers results in an empty customer list
1. Retrieves all existing customers
1. Deletes all customers one by one
2. Verifies that the customer list is empty after deletion

**Method:** `deleteCustomerTest()`

Tests that a deleted customer can be added back without exceptions
1. Saves the initial list of customers
2. Deletes all customers and verifies the list is empty
3. Adds all customers back with their original information
4. Verifies that the number of customers matches the initial count

---
### Sales Tests

**Method:** `deleteCustomerSalesAreDeletedTest()`

Tests that deleting a customer also removes its associated sales
1. Verifies that a specific customer exists and has sales
2. Deletes the customer
3. Confirms the customer no longer exists
4. Verifies that no sales remain for that customer's VAT number

**Method:** `addSaleIncreasesSalesNumberTest()`

Tests that adding a sale increases the total count by one
1. Gets the initial count of all sales
2. Adds a new sale for an existing customer
3. Verifies that the total count has increased by exactly one

**Method:** `newSaleHasOpenStatusTest()`

Tests that a newly created sale has the "Open" status ('O')
1. Creates a new sale for an existing customer
2. Retrieves the sales for that customer
3. Verifies that the most recent sale has status 'O'

**Method:** `newSaleHasZeroTotalTest()`

Tests that a newly created sale has a total of 0.0
1. Creates a new sale for an existing customer
2. Retrieves the sales for that customer
3. Verifies that the most recent sale has a total of 0.0

---
### Sale Deliveries Tests

**Method:** `getSaleDeliveriesForCustomerTest()`

Tests retrieval of sale deliveries for a specific customer
- Verifies that the expected number of deliveries (2) are returned

**Method:** `addNewSaleDeliveryTest()`

Tests adding a new delivery for a sale
1. Gets an existing sale and address for a customer
2. Records the initial number of deliveries
3. Adds a new sale delivery
4. Verifies that the number of deliveries has increased by one

## Service Layer Mocking

The current service layer implementation presents significant challenges for unit testing:

- The services are implemented as Java enums with singleton pattern:
  ```java
  public enum CustomerService {
      INSTANCE;
      // implementation...
  }
  
  public enum SaleService {
      INSTANCE;
      // implementation...
  }
  ```

- This design presents several barriers to mocking:
  1. Java enums cannot be extended or instantiated by Mockito
  2. The singleton pattern with static INSTANCE references creates hard-coded dependencies
  3. No dependency injection is possible with this design pattern

### Refactoring for Mockability

To enable proper unit testing with Mockito, the following refactoring would be needed:

1. Create Service interfaces to define contracts for each Service
   - `ICustomerService` for customer
    ```java
    // Example of Customer Service interface
    public interface ICustomerService {

        CustomerDTO getCustomerByVat(int vat) throws ApplicationException;

        void addCustomer(int vat, String designation, int phoneNumber) throws ApplicationException;

        // more methods...
    } 
    ```

    - `ISaleService` for sales
    ```java
    // Example of Sale Service interface
    public interface ISaleService {

        SalesDTO getSaleByCustomerVat(int vat) throws ApplicationException;

        SalesDTO getAllSales() throws ApplicationException;

        // more methods...
    }
    ```
    

2. Create concrete classes that implement the interfaces (essentially equal to the already existent Services)
   - `CustomerServiceImpl` implements `ICustomerService`
   - `SaleServiceImpl` implements `ISaleService`

3. Introduce dependency injection instead of hardcoded dependencies:
   - `SaleServiceImpl` would accept an `ICustomerService` in its constructor

    ```java
    // Example of the refactored class
    public class SaleServiceImpl implements ISaleService {
        private static SaleServiceImpl instance;
        private final ICustomerService customerService;
        
        // Static factory method for normal application use
        public static SaleServiceImpl getInstance() {
            if (instance == null) {
                instance = new SaleServiceImpl(CustomerServiceImpl.getInstance());
            }
            return instance;
        }
        
        // Constructor with dependency injection
        public SaleServiceImpl(ICustomerService customerService) {
            this.customerService = customerService;
        }
        
        // Implementation methods...
    }
    ```

### Mockito Test Example

This test verifies that `addSale()` correctly verifies customer existence through the `CustomerService` before creating a sale.

```java
public class SaleServiceTest {
    private ICustomerService mockCustomerService;
    private ISaleService saleService;
    
    @Before
    public void setUp() {
        mockCustomerService = mock(ICustomerService.class);
        saleService = new SaleServiceImpl(mockCustomerService);
    }
    
    @Test
    public void testAddSale_ValidCustomer_AddsSuccessfully() throws ApplicationException {
        
        int validVat = 241364817;
        CustomerDTO mockCustomer = new CustomerDTO(1, validVat, "Mock Customer", 966666666);
        
        // Define mock behavior
        when(mockCustomerService.isValidVAT(validVat)).thenReturn(true);
        when(mockCustomerService.getCustomerByVat(validVat)).thenReturn(mockCustomer);
        
        // call the method to test
        saleService.addSale(validVat);
        
        // verify the mock interaction
        verify(mockCustomerService).getCustomerByVat(validVat);
    }
}
```

## SUT Modifications

- During testing, a fault was discovered in the database schema design that manifested as a failure in referential integrity. Specifically:

    - Fault Location: Database schema foreign key constraints between Customer table and its dependent tables (Sales, Addresses, Deliveries)

    - Fault: Missing ON DELETE CASCADE constraints on foreign key relationships

    - Failure: When executing customer deletion operations, orphaned records remained in dependent tables, violating referential integrity

    The fault propagates through the following sequence (RIP model):
    1. Reachability: The fault is reached whenever a customer deletion operation is executed
    2. Infection: The database state becomes infected when the deletion occurs but dependent records remain
    3. Propagation: The infected state propagates to application failures when:
        - Queries attempt to reference non-existent customers
        - Data inconsistency causes incorrect business logic execution

    The issue was resolved by:
    1. Adding ON DELETE CASCADE constraints to all foreign key relationships referencing the Customer table in `createDDLHSQLDB.sql`
    2. Modifying table drop order in schema to respect referential integrity in `dropDDLHSQLDB.sql`

    This fix ensures proper cascading deletion behavior, which is verified by the `deleteCustomerSalesAreDeletedTest` test case.

- A security vulnerability was discovered in the Sale Delivery creation process:

    - Fault Location: `SaleService.addSaleDelivery()` method

    - Fault: Missing validation to ensure Sale and Address belong to the same customer

    - Failure: System allowed creating deliveries where a sale from one customer could be delivered to another customer's address

    The fault was resolved by:
    1. Adding a new method `getAddressById()` to `AddressRowDataGateway` to retrieve address information
    2. Modifying `SaleService.addSaleDelivery()` to verify that both the sale and address belong to the same customer by comparing their VAT numbers
    3. Throwing an `ApplicationException` if the VAT numbers don't match

    This fix ensures proper data integrity by preventing cross-customer deliveries, which can be verified by the `insertDeliveryTest` test case.
    
- To facilitate element selection in HtmlUnit tests, HTML table elements were given unique identifiers across the following JSP pages:

    - `CustomerInfo.jsp` and `addSaleDelivery.jsp`: 
        - Added `id="addressesTable`" to address tables
    - `SalesInfo.jsp`, `CloseSale.jsp`, and `addSaleDelivery.jsp`: 
        - Added `id="salesTable"` to sales tables  
    - `ShowSalesDelivery.jsp` and `SalesDeliveryInfo.jsp`: 
        - Added `id="salesDeliveryTable"` to sales delivery tables

Commit message:

fixed multiple addr to same sale id bug

vvs_webapp/vv02_58182.md, after:

# VVS02 - WebApp Integration Tests Report

INTRODUCTION


## End-to-end Testing

Five key test narratives were implemented using HtmlUnit inside the test class `HtmlUnitTests.java` of the package `vvs_webapp` to end-to-end test the SUT.

### Test Architecture

All tests share:
- a WebClient configuration
- a reference to the `index.html` page
- helper methods for common operations (adding/removing customers, creating sales, etc.)

Each test follows the same pattern:
- set up the necessary preconditions
- perform the actions being tested
- verify the intermediary steps and results with assertions
- clean up by removing any test data to leave the database in its original state

### 1. Adding Addresses to Existing Customer
**Method:** `addTwoAddressesToCustomerTest()`
- Retrieves an existing customer's VAT number
- Gets initial count of customer addresses
- Adds two new addresses with predefined data
- Verifies the address table now includes both new addresses
- Confirms the total row count increased by exactly two

### 2. Customer Insertion
**Method:** `insertTwoCustomersTest()`
- Adds two new customers with VAT, designation, and phone details
- Navigates to the "List All Customers" page
- Verifies all customer information appears correctly in the list
- Cleans up by removing the test customers

### 3. Sale Creation
**Method:** `insertSaleTest()`
- Creates a temporary customer
- Adds a new sale for this customer
- Verifies the sale appears with status "O" (Open)
- Confirms the sale is properly associated with the customer's VAT number
- Cleans up by removing the temporary customer

### 4. Sale Closure
**Method:** `closeSaleTest()`
- Creates a temporary customer
- Adds a new sale to the customer
- Retrieves the sale ID
- Closes the sale
- Verifies the sale status changes to "C" (Closed)
- Cleans up by removing the temporary customer

### 5. Delivery Creation
**Method:** `insertDeliveryTest()`
- Creates a new customer with complete details
- Adds an address to the customer
- Creates a new sale for the customer
- Navigates to the delivery creation page
- Retrieves the previously inserted sale ID and address ID
- Creates a delivery connecting the sale and address
- Verifies the delivery appears correctly in the delivery table


## Database Testing

Three test classes were implemented using DbSetup to test the database operations: `CustomersDBTest`, `SalesDBTest`, and `SaleDeliveriesDBTest`. The tests are supported by a utility class `DBSetupUtils` that handles database setup and provides common operations.

### Database Setup

The `DBSetupUtils` class provides:
- Constants for database connection
- Operations for cleaning the database (`DELETE_ALL`)
- Predefined test data including customers, sales, addresses, and deliveries
- Combined operations like `INSERT_CUSTOMER_SALE_DATA`, `INSERT_CUSTOMER_ADDRESS_DATA` and `INSERT_CUSTOMER_ADDRESS_SALE_DATA`

Each test class uses a similar setup strategy:
- `@BeforeAll`: Connects to the test database
- `@BeforeEach`: Resets the database and loads appropriate test data

### Customer Tests

**Method:** `addCustomerWithExistingVATTest()`

Tests that the SUT prevents adding a customer with an existing VAT number
1. Retrieves all existing customers
2. Attempts to add each customer again with the same data
3. Verifies that an `ApplicationException` is thrown for each attempt
4. Verifies that the number of customers matches the initial count

**Method:** `updateCustomerContactTest()`

Tests that customer contact information is properly updated
1. Retrieves all existing customers
2. Updates the phone number for all customers to a new value
3. Verifies that all customers now have the new phone number

**Method:** `deleteAllCustomersTest()`

Tests that deleting all customers results in an empty customer list
1. Retrieves all existing customers
1. Deletes all customers one by one
2. Verifies that the customer list is empty after deletion

**Method:** `deleteCustomerTest()`

Tests that a deleted customer can be added back without exceptions
1. Saves the initial list of customers
2. Deletes all customers and verifies the list is empty
3. Adds all customers back with their original information
4. Verifies that the number of customers matches the initial count

---
### Sales Tests

**Method:** `deleteCustomerSalesAreDeletedTest()`

Tests that deleting a customer also removes its associated sales
1. Verifies that a specific customer exists and has sales
2. Deletes the customer
3. Confirms the customer no longer exists
4. Verifies that no sales remain for that customer's VAT number

**Method:** `addSaleIncreasesSalesNumberTest()`

Tests that adding a sale increases the total count by one
1. Gets the initial count of all sales
2. Adds a new sale for an existing customer
3. Verifies that the total count has increased by exactly one

**Method:** `newSaleHasOpenStatusTest()`

Tests that a newly created sale has the "Open" status ('O')
1. Creates a new sale for an existing customer
2. Retrieves the sales for that customer
3. Verifies that the most recent sale has status 'O'

**Method:** `newSaleHasZeroTotalTest()`

Tests that a newly created sale has a total of 0.0
1. Creates a new sale for an existing customer
2. Retrieves the sales for that customer
3. Verifies that the most recent sale has a total of 0.0

---
### Sale Deliveries Tests

**Method:** `getSaleDeliveriesForCustomerTest()`

Tests retrieval of sale deliveries for a specific customer
- Verifies that the expected number of deliveries (2) are returned

**Method:** `addNewSaleDeliveryTest()`

Tests adding a new delivery for a sale
1. Gets an existing sale and address for a customer
2. Records the initial number of deliveries
3. Adds a new sale delivery
4. Verifies that the number of deliveries has increased by one

## Service Layer Mocking

The current service layer implementation presents significant challenges for unit testing:

- The services are implemented as Java enums with singleton pattern:
  ```java
  public enum CustomerService {
      INSTANCE;
      // implementation...
  }
  
  public enum SaleService {
      INSTANCE;
      // implementation...
  }
  ```

- This design presents several barriers to mocking:
  1. Java enums cannot be extended or instantiated by Mockito
  2. The singleton pattern with static INSTANCE references creates hard-coded dependencies
  3. No dependency injection is possible with this design pattern

### Refactoring for Mockability

To enable proper unit testing with Mockito, the following refactoring would be needed:

1. Create Service interfaces to define contracts for each Service
   - `ICustomerService` for customer
    ```java
    // Example of Customer Service interface
    public interface ICustomerService {

        CustomerDTO getCustomerByVat(int vat) throws ApplicationException;

        void addCustomer(int vat, String designation, int phoneNumber) throws ApplicationException;

        // more methods...
    } 
    ```

    - `ISaleService` for sales
    ```java
    // Example of Sale Service interface
    public interface ISaleService {

        SalesDTO getSaleByCustomerVat(int vat) throws ApplicationException;

        SalesDTO getAllSales() throws ApplicationException;

        // more methods...
    }
    ```
    

2. Create concrete classes that implement the interfaces (essentially equal to the already existent Services)
   - `CustomerServiceImpl` implements `ICustomerService`
   - `SaleServiceImpl` implements `ISaleService`

3. Introduce dependency injection instead of hardcoded dependencies:
   - `SaleServiceImpl` would accept an `ICustomerService` in its constructor

    ```java
    // Example of the refactored class
    public class SaleServiceImpl implements ISaleService {
        private static SaleServiceImpl instance;
        private final ICustomerService customerService;
        
        // Static factory method for normal application use
        public static SaleServiceImpl getInstance() {
            if (instance == null) {
                instance = new SaleServiceImpl(CustomerServiceImpl.getInstance());
            }
            return instance;
        }
        
        // Constructor with dependency injection
        public SaleServiceImpl(ICustomerService customerService) {
            this.customerService = customerService;
        }
        
        // Implementation methods...
    }
    ```

### Mockito Test Example

This test verifies that `addSale()` correctly verifies customer existence through the `CustomerService` before creating a sale.

```java
public class SaleServiceTest {
    private ICustomerService mockCustomerService;
    private ISaleService saleService;
    
    @Before
    public void setUp() {
        mockCustomerService = mock(ICustomerService.class);
        saleService = new SaleServiceImpl(mockCustomerService);
    }
    
    @Test
    public void testAddSale_ValidCustomer_AddsSuccessfully() throws ApplicationException {
        
        int validVat = 241364817;
        CustomerDTO mockCustomer = new CustomerDTO(1, validVat, "Mock Customer", 966666666);
        
        // Define mock behavior
        when(mockCustomerService.isValidVAT(validVat)).thenReturn(true);
        when(mockCustomerService.getCustomerByVat(validVat)).thenReturn(mockCustomer);
        
        // call the method to test
        saleService.addSale(validVat);
        
        // verify the mock interaction
        verify(mockCustomerService).getCustomerByVat(validVat);
    }
}
```

## SUT Modifications

**Modifications related to bug fixes**

- A fault was discovered in the database schema design that manifested as a failure in referential integrity. Specifically:

    - Fault Location: Database schema foreign key constraints between Customer table and its dependent tables (Sales, Addresses, Deliveries)

    - Fault: Missing ON DELETE CASCADE constraints on foreign key relationships

    - Failure: When executing customer deletion operations, orphaned records remained in dependent tables, violating referential integrity

    The fault propagates through the following sequence (RIP model):
    1. Reachability: The fault is reached whenever a customer deletion operation is executed
    2. Infection: The database state becomes infected when the deletion occurs but dependent records remain
    3. Propagation: The infected state propagates to application failures when:
        - Queries attempt to reference non-existent customers
        - Data inconsistency causes incorrect business logic execution

    The issue was resolved by:
    1. Adding ON DELETE CASCADE constraints to all foreign key relationships referencing the Customer table in `createDDLHSQLDB.sql`
    2. Modifying table drop order in schema to respect referential integrity in `dropDDLHSQLDB.sql`

    This fix ensures proper cascading deletion behavior, which is verified by the `deleteCustomerSalesAreDeletedTest` test case.

- A security vulnerability was discovered in the Sale Delivery creation process:

    - Fault Location: `SaleService.addSaleDelivery()` method

    - Fault: Missing validation to ensure Sale and Address belong to the same customer

    - Failure: System allowed creating deliveries where a sale from one customer could be delivered to another customer's address

    The fault was resolved by:
    1. Adding a new method `getAddressById()` to `AddressRowDataGateway` to retrieve address information
    2. Modifying `SaleService.addSaleDelivery()` to verify that both the sale and address belong to the same customer by comparing their VAT numbers
    3. Throwing an `ApplicationException` if the VAT numbers don't match

    This fix ensures proper data integrity by preventing cross-customer deliveries, which can be verified by the `insertDeliveryTest` test case.

- A data integrity issue was discovered in the Sale Delivery creation process:

    - Fault Location: `SaleService.addSaleDelivery()` method

    - Fault: Missing validation to prevent multiple delivery addresses for the same sale

    - Failure: System allowed a single sale to be associated with multiple delivery addresses, potentially causing delivery confusion

    The fault was resolved by:
    1. Adding a new method `updateAddressId()` to `SaleDeliveryRowDataGateway` to modify existing delivery addresses
    2. Modifying `SaleService.addSaleDelivery()` to check if a sale already has a delivery
    3. If a delivery exists, updating its address instead of creating a new one
    4. If no delivery exists, creating a new one as before

    This fix ensures that each sale can only have one delivery address at a time, which can be verified by the `insertDeliveryTest` test case.

**Minor modifications**
    
- To facilitate element selection in HtmlUnit tests, HTML table elements were given unique identifiers across the following JSP pages:

    - `CustomerInfo.jsp` and `addSaleDelivery.jsp`: 
        - Added `id="addressesTable`" to address tables
    - `SalesInfo.jsp`, `CloseSale.jsp`, and `addSaleDelivery.jsp`: 
        - Added `id="salesTable"` to sales tables  
    - `ShowSalesDelivery.jsp` and `SalesDeliveryInfo.jsp`: 
        - Added `id="salesDeliveryTable"` to sales delivery tables
